---
layout: post
title: Controlling a Drone with a PS4 Controller
---

This post details a method of using a Playstation 4 controller as an input method to control a drone running Betaflight firmware (or similar). Essentially it uses an on-board companion computer such as a Raspberry Pi to connect to the controller, convert the signals and send them to the flight controller using the [MultiWii Serial Protocol](http://www.multiwii.com/wiki/index.php?title=Multiwii_Serial_Protocol). Although a Playstation 4 controller is used here, the method should allow any standard game controller to be used in the same way.

*Note: Understand that MSP is not recommended as an input method during flight by the Betaflight team, and so requires modification to the built-in failsafes. If you crash your drone or damage anything using the control method detailed here don't blame me*

(fancy schematic of everything will go here)

### Controller Inputs

To start, the PS4 controller can be connected to the Raspberry Pi using bluetooth. This can be done either through the terminal using `bluetoothctl` or with a third party gui. Once it is connected, Approximate Enigneering's [Python Controller Library](https://approxeng.github.io/approxeng.input/index.html) is used to get the controller inputs. For this project, only the two analog sticks and some buttons will be used, but the controller library can get the values from the controller's touchpad and internal inertial measurement unit if required. The library supports a wide range of common game controllers, see [here](https://approxeng.github.io/approxeng.input/simpleusage.html#button-names) for details on other supported controllers.

```python
from approxeng.input.selectbinder import ControllerResource

with ControllerResource() as joystick:
    while joystick.connected:
        x1,y1,x2,y2,r1_button,l1_button = joystick['lx','ly','rx','ry','r1','l1']
```

### Control Mapping

The main control inputs to the drone will be pitch, roll, throttle and yaw. For consistency with standard RC controllers, these will be mapped to the PS4 controller analog sticks. The output for analog controls from the approxeng input library vary from -1 to 1 in the x and y for each analog stick. These values must be shifted and scaled before they are sent to the flight controller. Other buttons can also mapped to any available aux RC inputs (to arm the drone for example).

The exact map of each control input will largely depending on the requirments of the project. In this case, the RC values within Betaflight vary from 0 to 3000, with 1500 as the mid-point. The throttle control is slightly different, as most game controllers have self-centering analog sticks, unlike most RC controllers used for drones.

```python
roll = (x2+1) * 1500
pitch = (y2+1) * 1500
throttle = (y1+1.2561) * 820
yaw = (x1+1) * 1500

# since PS4 controller has self-centering throttle
if throttle < 1030:
    throttle = 1030
```

This conversion takes the pitch, roll and yaw imputs from -1 to 1 and directly maps them on a scale from 0 to 3000, with each self-centering at 0, mapping to the 1500 midpoint in Betaflight. The throttle mapping in this case sets the self-centering stick midpoint to the minimum throttle of 1030 and the maximum stick input to the maximum throttle of 1850. This may vary depending on indivudual setups so different shift and scale values can be calculated.

### to add...

* hardware connection
* pyMultiWii
* Betaflight firmware modification?
